feat: waku sync 2.0 (#47)
waku-org/specs: standards/core/sync.md

 - Hanno Cornelius <hanno@status.im>
---

# Abstract
This specification explains `WAKU-SYNC`
which enables the synchronization of messages between 2 Store nodes.

# Specification

Waku Sync consists of 2 protocols; reconciliation and transfer.

> Reconciliation is the process of finding differences in 2 sets of message hashes.

Author: I'll try to clarify. Indeed fingerprints are of hashes only and sync ranges are IDs based.

Transfer is then used to bilaterally send messages to the other peer.
The end goal being that both peers have the same set of hashes and messages.

#### Terminology
The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, 
“RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

## Reconciliation

**Libp2p Protocol identifier**: `/vac/waku/reconciliation/1.0.0`

#### Message Ids
Message Ids MUST be composed of the timestamp and the hash of the Waku messages.

The timestamp MUST be the time of creation and
the hash MUST follow the
[deterministic message hashing specification](https://rfc.vac.dev/waku/standards/core/14/message#deterministic-message-hashing)

> This way the message Ids can always be totally ordered.

> Chronologically according to the timestamp and

Reviewer: The message IDs are ordered chronologically,....

(Sentence needs a subject and verb)

disambiguate based on the hash lexical order
in cases where the timestamp is the same.

#### Range Bounds
A range MUST consists of 2 Id bounds, the first bound is
inclusive the second bound exclusive.
The first bound MUST be strictly smaller than the second one.

#### Range Fingerprinting
The fingerprint of a range MUST be the XOR operation applied to
all the hashes of the messages included in that range.

#### Range Type

> Every range MUST have one of the following types; skip, fingerprint or item set.

Reviewer: Nitpick, but could to typographically highlight repeated concepts

```suggestion
Every range MUST have one of the following types; `skip`, `fingerprint` or `item set`.
```

- Skip type is used to signal already processed ranges that MUST be ignored.
- Fingerprint type signify that fingerprints MUST be compared when received.
- Item set type contain multiple message Ids that MUST all be compared when received.
> Item sets are an optimization, stopping the recursion early can
save network roundtrips.

#### Range Processing
Ranges have to be processed differently according to their types.

- Skip ranges MUST be merged with other consecutive ones if possible.
- Equal fingerprint ranges MUST become skip ranges.
- Unequal fingerprint ranges MUST be splitted into smaller ranges. The new type MAY be either fingerprint or item set.
- Unresolved item set ranges MUST be checked for differences and marked resolved.
- Resolved item set ranges MUST be checked for differences and become skip ranges.

### Delta Encoding

> For efficient transmission of timestamps, hashes and ranges. Payloads are delta encoded as follow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Payloads MUST be delta encoded as follows.
for efficient transmission of timestamps, hashes and ranges. 
```

Nitpick here.

The storage implementation should reflect the context.
Most messages that will be added will be recent and
removed messages will be older ones.
When differences are found some messages will have to be inserted randomly.
It is expected to be a less likely case than time based insertion and removal.
Last but not least it must be optimized for fingerprinting
as it is the most often used operation.

#### Sync Interval
Ad-hoc syncing can be useful in some cases but continuous periodic sync
minimize the differences in messages stored across the network.
Syncing early and often is the best strategy.
The default used in Nwaku is 5 minutes interval between sync with a range of 1 hour.

#### Sync Window
By default we offset the sync window by 20 seconds in the past.
The actual start of the sync range is T-01:00:20 and the end T-00:00:20 in most cases.
This is to handle the inherent jitters of GossipSub.
In other words, it is the amount of time needed to confirm if a message is missing or not.

#### Peer Choice
Wrong peering strategies can lead to inadvertently segregating peers and
reduce sampling diversity.
Nwaku randomly select peers to sync with for simplicity and robustness.

> Good strategies can be devised but we chose not to.

Reviewer: I would simply say something like:

```suggestion
More sophisticated strategies may be implemented in future.
```

 - Hanno Cornelius <hanno@status.im>
---

# Abstract
This specification explains `WAKU-SYNC`
which enables the synchronization of messages between nodes storing sets of [`14/WAKU2-MESSAGE`](https://rfc.vac.dev/waku/standards/core/14/message)

# Specification

> Waku Sync consists of 2 libp2p protocols; reconciliation and transfer.

Author: Good advice. Thanks!

The Reconciliation protocol finds differences in sets of messages.
The Transfer protocol is used to exchange the differences found with other peers.
The end goal being that peers have the same set of messages.

#### Terminology
The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, 
“RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

## Reconciliation

**Libp2p Protocol identifier**: `/vac/waku/reconciliation/1.0.0`

The protocol finds differences between 2 peers by
comparing _fingerprints_ of _ranges_ of message _IDs_.

> _Ranges_ are encoded into payloads, exchanged between the peers and when the range _fingerprints_ are different, splitted into smaller ones.

Author: Looks like `splitted` is not a word. The more you know...

This process repeats until _ranges_ include a small number of messages
at this point _IDs_ are sent for comparison instead of _fingerprints_.

#### Overview

1. The requestor choose a time range to sync.
2. The range is encoded into a payload and sent.
3. The requestee receive the payload and decode it.
4. The range is processed and more ranges produced.
5. The new ranges are encoded and sent.

> 6. Payloads are repeatedly exchanged and differences between the peers are discovered.

Author: `until` is misleading here. I'll try to find a new formulation.

> 7. The synchronization is done when no ranges are left to process.

Author: Well the process is the same. Diffs may be found but nothing changes. I'll try to rephrase.

> This way the message Ids can always be totally ordered,
first chronologically according to the timestamp and then
disambiguate based on the hash lexical order
in cases where the timestamp is the same.

#### Range Bounds
A _range_ MUST consists of 2 _IDs_, the first bound is
inclusive the second bound exclusive.
The first bound MUST be strictly smaller than the second one.

#### Range Fingerprinting
The _fingerprint_ of a range MUST be the XOR operation applied to
the hash of all message _IDs_ included in that _range_.

#### Range Type
Every _range_ MUST have one of the following types; _fingerprint_, _skip_ or _item set_.

- _Fingerprint_ type contains a _fingerprint_.
- _Skip_ type contains nothing and is used to signal already processed _ranges_.
- _Item set_ type contains message _Ids_ and a _resolved_ boolean.
> _Item sets_ are an optimization, sending multiple _IDs_ instead of
recursing further reduce the number of round-trips.

#### Range Processing
_Ranges_ have to be processed differently according to their types.

- **Equal** _fingerprint ranges_ MUST become _skip ranges_.

> - **Unequal** _fingerprint ranges_ MUST be splitted into smaller ranges. The new type MAY be either _fingerprint_ or _item set_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Unequal** _fingerprint ranges_ MUST be split into smaller ranges. The new type MAY be either _fingerprint_ or _item set_.
```

Reviewer: Shall we add some guidance here as to when the new type is another fingerprint and when it is an item set? We don't need numbers, unless it's hardcoded, but we could just specify that when the new range is "small enough" the individual IDs can be encoded into an item set.

Reviewer: Update: you can even point to the implementation section on "item set threshold". Here you can just mention that if number of items in a range fall below _a_ threshold, it becomes an item set rather than just a fingerprint.

> - **Unresolved** _item set_ ranges MUST be checked for differences and marked resolved.

Reviewer: What is the output of "checked for differences"? Does this peer just locally find and keep a list of missing IDs to be requested via transfer or does it also find the list of missing IDs in remote peer and send that in a subsequent message? I think probably the latter, but good idea to be explicit here: Unresolved item set...checked for differences. The IDs missing locally are ... (kept to be requested via transfer)?; the IDs missing in the remote peer are...(compiled and sent in a resolved set?); the item set is marked resolved (and sent to the remote peer?)

Author: Both actually, all differences are sent to the transfer protocol.

I'll try to make this clearer.

> - **Resolved** _item set_ ranges MUST be checked for differences and become skip ranges.

Reviewer: Is it possible to receive a resolved set simply because this set has been resolved in the remote peer? In other words, it's not resolved by _this_ peer yet?

Author: I'm not sure I understand.

An unequal fingerprint range can be received and produce an unresolved item set range.
An unresolved item set range can be received and produce a resolved item set range.
A resolved item set can be received and produces a skip range.

Those are the possible cases.

Author: Input -> process -> output

You don't process your own output.

the same as the exclusive upper bounds of the previous range or zero.

To achieve this, it MAY be needed to add _skip ranges_.
> For example, a _skip range_ can be added with
an exclusive upper bound equal to the first range lower bound.
This way the receiving peer knows to ignore the range from zero to the start of the sync time window.

Every _ID_'s timestamps after the first MUST be noted as the difference from the previous one.
If the timestamp is the same, zero MUST be used and the hash MUST be added.
The added hash MUST be truncated up to and including the first differentiating byte.

| Timestamp | Hash | Timestamp (encoded) | Hash (encoded) 
| - | - | - | -
| 1000 | 0x4a8a769a... | 1000 | -
| 1002 | 0x351c5e86... | 2 | -
| 1002 | 0x3560d9c4... | 0 | 0x3560
| 1003 | 0xbeabef25... | 1 | -

#### Varints
All _varints_ MUST be little-endian base 128 variable length integers (LEB128) and minimally encoded.

#### Payload encoding
The wire level payload MUST be encoded as follow.
> The & denote concatenation.

1. _varint_ bytes of the delta encoded timestamp &
2. if timestamp is zero, 1 byte for the hash bytes length & the hash bytes &
3. 1 byte, the _range_ type &
4. either

>     - 32 bytes _fingerprint_ &
>     - _varint_ bytes of the item set length & bytes of every items &

Reviewer: Question, rather than a suggestion - the `&` makes it seem like these items will be concatenated, but if I understand correctly only one of the three listed are added. Perhaps "or" is a bit clearer after "either"?

```suggestion
    - 32 bytes _fingerprint_ or
    - _varint_ bytes of the item set length & bytes of every items or
```

    - if _skip range_, do nothing

5. repeat steps 1 to 4 for all ranges.

## Transfer Protocol

**Libp2p Protocol identifier**: `/vac/waku/transfer/1.0.0`

The transfer protocol SHOULD send messages as soon as
a difference is found via reconciliation.
It MUST only accept messages from peers the node is reconciliating with.
New message IDs MUST be added to the reconciliation protocol.
The payload sent MUST follow the wire specification below.

### Wire specification
```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

package waku.sync.transfer.v1;

import "waku/message/v1/message.proto";

message WakuMessageAndTopic {
  // Full message content and associated pubsub_topic as value
  optional waku.message.v1.WakuMessage message = 1;
  optional string pubsub_topic = 2;
}
```

# Implementation
The flexibility of the protocol implies that much is left to the implementers.
What will follow is NOT part of the specification.
This section was created to inform implementations.

#### Parameters 
Two useful parameters to add to your implementation are partitioning count and the item set threshold.

> The partitioning count is the number of time a range is splitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The partitioning count is the number of time a range is split.
```

> Higher value reduce round trips at the cost of computing more fingerprints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A higher value reduces round trips at the cost of computing more fingerprints.
```

> The threshold for which item sets are sent instead of fingerprints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The item set threshold determines when item sets are sent instead of fingerprints.
```

> Higher value sends more items which means higher chance of duplicates but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A higher value sends more items which means higher chance of duplicates but
```

> reduce the amount of round trips overall.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reduces the amount of round trips overall.
```
